
### Problem Statement
Generate a video caption for an input video using a sequential-to-sequential model. The input for the code will be a video, and the output will be a stream of captions describing the actions in the video. This is achieved using Recurrent Neural Networks.

### Requirements
- Python
- Cuda (GPU)
- torch
- scipy
- numpy
- pandas
- pickle

The training dataset is stored in the scratch location on Palmetto as denoted in the code. The location of the model and the train/test labels have been hard-coded into the program. The user has the option of providing the file path for testing files in the .sh file along with the name of the output file. The output file will be available in the local directory of code files. The compute file contains the training and the model definition code.

### Dataset
The same dataset provided by the professor has been utilized to train and test the model. The dataset has 1450 videos for training and 100 for testing. We also have training and testing label .json files that provide labels to train our model.

### Program Data Structures
The basic requirement for the seq2seq model is a dictionary as prescribed in the slides. Below is a basic mapping for the words and vice-versa.

Tokens:
- PAD: Pad the sentence to the same length.
- BOS: Begin of a sentence, sign to generate the output sentence.
- EOS: End of a sentence, sign to end the output sentence.
- UNK: Token for an unknown word in the dictionary.

All the below data structures are stored as python dictionaries.
- word_dict: Contains the number of occurrences of a word in the training label file by generating a vocabulary. Any word having a frequency less than 4 is ignored.
- w2i: Contains the word to index mapping for the words in the vocabulary.
- i2w: Contains the index to word reverse mapping for the vocabulary.

### Model
The model has 2 layers, namely, encoder and decoder. The GRU – Gated Recurrent Units is used to design both these layers. The GRU is faster than LSTM as it has fewer training parameters and therefore uses less memory and executes faster than LSTM. As the dataset has smaller sequences of data, the GRU provides faster results with comparable accuracies to LSTM.

The encoder processes the video and encodes it into the necessary format. The decoder is then used to segment the captions based on the beginning and ending tokens and perform video processing over the words to produce actual words.

### Attention Layer
The attention layer allows the model to peek at different sections of inputs at each decoding time step. The structure of the attention layer is adopted from the paper titled "Attention-based convolution neural network for semantic relation extraction" by Shen and Huang. The hidden state of the decoder and encoder output is used as a matching function to a scalar, and then passed through a softmax transformation. The last new hidden state is then sent to the next time step of the decoder.

### Schedule Sampling
At inference, the unknown previous token is replaced by a token generated by the model itself. This discrepancy between training and inference can yield errors that can accumulate quickly along the generated sequence. This problem, called the "exposure bias" problem, can be solved by feeding (groundtruth) or (last time step's output) as input at odds while training the model.

### Model Parameters and Evaluation
- Epochs = 100
- Learning Rate = 0.0001
- Batch Size = 128
- Hidden Layers = 512
- Optimizer = Adam Optimizer
- Dropout = 0.3
- Teacher Learning Ratio = 0.7
- Vocab Size = n > 4

The loss of the model in the last epoch is 1.4123.

The BLEU score of the model is 0.699 for the test data provided for evaluation.
